# Introduction to Distributed Systems
---
[Go Back](../README.md)

---
## Definition
- Several autonomous computers
- They send messages between them (communication)
- They collaborate to look like a single coherent system.
---
## Examples
### Distributed information
- **File systems**
	- Several computers with its own disks as a large disk
	- Used in big data
	- Allow replication
	- Example. Hadoop File System (HDFS)
- **P2P Applications**
	- Several nodes running identical processes.
	- Every node is both client and server at the same time.
	- Shared document distributed in several machines = no bottleneck
	- Example. BitTorrent
### Distributed computing
- **Grid computing**
	- Creates a mesh of heterogeneous computers (most of the time in idle).
	- Some of them provide computing capability to another.
	- Uses a middleware to cooperate.
- **Clusters**
	- Uses homogeneous (same architecture) computers.
	- Geographically close, usually mounted in the same rack.
- **Cloud computing**
	- Deploys a virtualization service over a cluster.
	- Provides VMs to one or several users.
	- Infraestructure as a Service (IaaS)
	- Types:
		- Service-oriented allows adding/removing resources as needed. (No human interaction)
		- Monolithic uses a single machine
---
## Advantages and problems
### Advantages
- **Cost**
	- Cluster can be build with several cheap PCs (usually lots of them)
	- Always cheaper than a supercomputer
- **Scalability**
	- Growing = Adding more PCs to the system.
- **Performance**
	- All PCs can work in parallel (Specific designed algorithms)
- **Fault Tolerance**
	- If a computer fails all the others still working. System keep working during reparation.
	- The more computers the more availability.
	- Redundancy between PCs
### Goals and challenges
- **Security**
	- Privacy. Only authorised users can access the contents.
	- Integrity. No message alteration in transmission.
	- Authentication. Assure the legit destination of message.
- **Transparency**. (Hide the distributed nature of the system)
	- Access Transparency.
		- Information presented heterogeneous although it is not.
	- Location Transparency.
		- Hides the real machine and resource. System as a whole.
	- Replication Transparency.
		- Hides replicated information for redundancy.
	- Migration Transparency.
		- Hides if a resource is moved from one machine to another
		- Related to location transparency.
	- Failure Transparency.
		- Hides if a machine fails.
- **Openness**
	- Use of standards, modularity, components-based, open interfaces (open source).
	- Facilitates the interoperability of these systems.
- **Scalability**
	- Allow system to adapt to the size of the data it has to handle.
	- It must allow to add more computers.
---
## Models or paradigms
- **Message Passing** (send and receive)
	- Connection Oriented
		- Has a handshake
		- Estabish a virtual communication channel
	- Datagram Oriented
		- Simply sends datagram
		- Best effort to route the datagram to its destination
		- No ACK unless response datagram
- **Client-server model**
	- Server
		- Passive role
		- Waits until recv a request. Then generates response.
	- Client
		- Active role
		- Sends request and waits for the response.
- **Remote Procedure Calls (RPC)**
	- Similar to Client-server model
	- The client calls a function or procedure in a procedural language (C, Java, Python...)
	- The server executes the functionality and sends the response.
	- The message passed is the function and its call parameters. (Requires Middleware)
- **Remote method invocation (RMI)**
	- Similar to RPC but for OOP programming.
	- An object invokes a method that is in another remote object.
- **Peer to peer (P2P) networking**
	- No client/server distinction. Each node plays both roles.
	- Any node can initialise the communication with other at any time.
	- Facilitates the implementation of decentralised algorithms. (Downloading apps)
- **Mobile agents**
	- Program or object (OOP) that is transportable:
		1. Pause its execution.
		2. Copy itself to another machine. (Jump)
		3. Resume its execution.
	- Can be architecture independent (Java or Python)
- **Web Services**
	- Uses HTML protocol
	- Form of remote invocation (`POST,` `GET`, `PUT`...)
	- Objects located by an URL
	- Previously XML to transport data. Now JSON (RESTful implementation)
---