# Message Oriented Middleware (MOM)
---
[Go Back](../README.md)

---
## Introduction
- **Objective:**
    - Decouples distributed components for asynchronous communication.
- **Comparison:**
    - **RPC:** Both endpoints need to be active (synchronous). Like a phone call.
    - **MOM:** Communication in turns, only one needs to be active. Like an email.
- **Advantages of MOM:**
    - **Flexibility:** Enables new architectural patterns.
    - **Producer-Consumer Model:**
        - **Producer:** Sends messages to MOM.
        - **Consumer:** Receives and processes messages from MOM.
        - MOM can act as a load balancer.
---
## Broker concept
- **Definition:**
	- Intermediary component that stores and distributes the messages in MOM.
	- Can be either centralised or distributed.
- **Functions:**
	1. **Transform information.**
		- Group several messages according to some criteria
		- Split large messages into several sub-messages.
	2. **Route information**
		- Direct messages to the appropriate destinations.
		- In distributed brokers they need to communicate between them.
	3. **Distribution patters implementation**
		- Point-to-point (queues for specific consumers)
		- Subscriptions. (queues for topics)
		- Broadcast
	4. **Message persistent storage**
		- Stores messages in machines file system.
		- Many messaging systems are also databases.
- **Advantages:**
	- Simplify communications. Reduce connections from $N^2$ - N to $2N$.
	- Communication between different environments and languages.
---
## Standardisation
1. Financial environments. Closed, proprietary solutions like *IBM MQseries*.
2. (2001) JMS (_Java Message Service_) solution.
3. (2004) AMQP (_Advanced Message Queuing Protocol_) standard.
4. (2007) *RabbitMQ*. First open source solution.
---
## Architecture
1. **Processes:** Non-fixed roles: Producer and consumer.
2. **Channels:** Software constructions used by the processes to send and receive.
3. **Messages:** Follow  AMQP standard. Divided into header and content.
4. **Intermediate elements**
	1. Exchanges. Receive messages from the producer and send them to one or more queues.
	2. Queues. Store messages in persistent memory waiting to be read by a consumer.
	3. Bindings. Associate exchanges with queues in different ways
		- Direct (producer specifies queue)
		- Fan-out (message replicated in several queues)
		- Per-topic (messages' topic specifies queue)
---
## Problematic
1. The broker is a single point of failure and bottleneck
2. Asynchronous and event-driven programming is more difficult.
3. Difficult to adapt to a synchronous model (RPC type).
4. Worse performance than RPCs.
5. One slow subscriber can affect others
---