# Architectures
---
[Go Back](../README.md)

---
## Architectures
### Introduction
- Focus on:
	- how to place software components on different computers.
	- How these components relate to each other.
- Types elements
	- Components. Units with well-defined purpose which can be replaced by others.
	- Connectors. Middleware that acts as intermediary between components.
### Architectural Styles
- **Layered architectures**
	- Components are isolated in layers (like TCP/IP).
	- Each layer can only interact with other immediate upper or lower layer.
	- Software typically: low-level (closest to hardware) to high-level (most abstract)
	- Typical DS layers: platform, middleware and applications/services
- **Object-based architectures**
	- Components are isolated in objects.
	- Any object can call any function or method exposed by others.
	- Calls are performed with a client-server paradigm (synchronous).
- **Event-based architectures**
	- Intermediary called *Event Bus* where components can generate and react to events.
	- Weakly coupled (easily replaceable components) = Fault tolerant and scalable.
	- Example. *Publisher/subscriber* model.
	- Usually supported in MOM.
- **Data-centric architectures**
	- Indirect communications through a passive data store (distributed file systems like NFS).
	- Similar to event-based. Two ways:
		- Polling (frequent reading) to the data store. Example. GitHub
		- Shared Data Space if combined with events.
			- Data store is able to notify components when there is new data.
			- Examples.
				- Files in the cloud. Dropbox or OneDrive.
				- Databases with reporting capabilities. Redis or MongoDB.
### System Architectures
- **Centralized** (Client-server)
	- One element is central to the operation of the system. It can be distributed.
	- 3 tiers. Client (browser), business logic (server) and storage (database)
- **Decentralized** (Peer-to-peer)
	- All elements are equal to each other and thus have all layers present.
	- Types of structures (way of organising nodes)
		- Structured (deterministic) or Unstructured (non-deterministic or random)
---
## Client-server architecture
- Functionalities structured in layers
	- Presentation. Displays the UI and captures the events in it.
	- Application logic. Receives events and reacts executing functions (business logic)
	- Storage. Stores data (database) generated or required by business logic.
- Functional layer division into components
	- P2P. All layers in a single component..
	- Client-server. Part in a client component and other in the server one.
	- Multilevel. Each layer is implemented in a different component.
---
## Decentralized architectures
- Data is different between nodes. To make them interchangeable data should be replicated.
- **Network overlay**
	- Is a new network based on the identifiers for the peers (distributed system processes).
	- Underlying physical network is unimportant.
	- Links between nodes correspond to the node connections.
	- Each node needs a list that associates some peers to its IPs.
- Types of algorithms to create the overlay network
	- **Structured**
		- Distributed Hash Table algorithm
		- Advantage. Always know which node has the data of interest.
	- **Unstructured**
		- Depend on the order in which the nodes are added or removed from the network.
		- Disadvantage. Flood type search algorithms to find the data of interest.
		- Advantage. Easier to create and allow many concurrent (dis)connections (churning)
	- **Hybrid**
		- Similar to unstructured but there are special nodes called superpeers.
		- Superpeers store indexes (content-node relation) and act as brokers (intermediaries)
		- Peers download meta-information from superpeers and announce themselves.
---