# Security
---
[Go Back](../README.md)

---
## Introduction
### Threats
- **Interception or leakage**. Unauthorised access to a service or data.
- **Interruption**. Service or data is no longer available.
- **Modification**. Data is modified or a service altered so it does not work as it should.
- **Manufacturing**. New data or new activity in a service that should not be there appears.
### Security policies and mechanisms
Mechanisms are used to force compliance with the security policies.
- **Cryptography**
- **Authorization** (access control)
- **Authentication**
- **Auditing** (Accounting)
### Cryptography
- **Phases**
	- Encryption or encoding
	- Decryption or decoding
- **Ways**
	- Primitive algorithms were based on the secrecy of the algorithm.
	- Modern algorithms are based on a cryptographic key (long sequence of bits).
- **Types of algorithms**
	- Symmetric key.
		- Use the same (symmetric) key for both encryption and decryption.
		- They use simple operations for transforming the bits of the message.
		- Communicating the value of the key is a problem.
	- Asymmetric key (private/public key)
		- One key for encryption and other for decryption. Mathematically related.
		- One key is made public and the other remains private.
		- The computational complexity is a problem.
- **Usage**
	- Large volumes of data.
		- Symmetric encryption for data. (more efficient)
		- Asymmetric encryption to share the key.
	- To guaranty authenticity
		- Asymmetric key pairs for digital signature and digital certificate.
### Cryptographic hash
- `H(m) = h` transforms a sequence of any number of bits into a fixed length sequence.
- **Properties**
	- Having `h` is not possible to find a value `m'` such that `H(m') = h`
	- Weak collision resistance.
		- Knowing `h`, `m` and `H()` is not possible to find `m'` such that `H(m') = h` 
	- Strong collision resistance.
		- Knowing `H()` is impossible to find `m` and `m'` such that `H(m) = H(m')`
- Some algorithms are MD5 and SHA.
---
## Symmetric key cryptography
### Block-oriented algorithms
- **Definition**
	- Divides the information into several fixed-size blocks.
	- The encryption/decryption algorithm is applied to each block.
- **Some algorithms**
	- Data Encryption Standard (DES)
		- Developed by IBM and adopted by the US Government
		- 64-bit blocks with a 56-bit key.
		- Operations without specific reason raised suspicion that it may have a back door.
	- Advances Encryption Standard (AES)
		- Successor of DES and current standard.
		- 128-bit blocks and keys of 128, 192 and 256 bits.
		- Blocks arranged in 4x4 byte matrix for operations.
	- Blowfish
		- Only one without patent.
		- Vulnerabilities were found so Twofish was created.
### Flow-oriented algorithms
- A vector (pseudo-random sequence of bytes) is generated based on the key.
- Each byte of the message is mixed (usually XOR) with a byte of the vector.
- **RC4 algorithm**.
	- First proprietary but leakage.
	- Easy to implement. Used in WEP, WPA, SSH, RPD, etc.
	- Problem in the initialisation of the vector. It is of finite size so values are recycled.
---
## Asymmetric (or public) key cryptography
### Basics
- **Notation**
	- Private or secret key `K_s` and the public key `K_p`
	- Encrypt function `E(m, k) = m'` and  Decrypt function `D(m', k) = m`
	- Then `D(E(M, K_p), K_s) = M` and `D(E(M, K_s), K_p) = M`.
- **RSA algorithm**
	- Key pair is generated from two randomly chosen, very large prime numbers.
	- Once generated the key pair, the prime numbers are discarded.
	- The public key and the product of the two prime numbers must known.
	- Quantum computing pose a threat to this algorithm.
### Secret files (confidentiality)
- For confidential communication, both ends should have a pair of keys.
- Each end shares its public key and keeps secret its private key.
- Sender uses receivers public key to encrypt the message 
- Only the receiver can decrypt the message with its private key.
### Digital signature (authentication)
- Similar to secret files but reversed.
- A user uses its private key for encrypting a message.
- Decrypting the message with that user's public key guarantees its authenticity.
- Non-repudiation property. Signer cannot deny having encrypted that message.
- In practice not the whole message is signed but its hash. Both must are sent.
- For confidentiality and authentication
	- First encrypt with senders private key (authentication)
	- Then encrypt with receivers public key (confidentiality)
### Man-In-the-Middle (MiM) attacks
- How they work?
	- The victims A and B exchange its public key through an insecure channel
	- The attacker C intercepts the key exchange and replaces them by its own key.
	- Now he can remain in the middle without notice.
		- Receives messages encrypted with its own key so he can decrypt them.
		- Then he encrypts the messages with the keys he intercepted.
		- Finally it forwards them to its destination.
- Solution. Certificates
	- How they work?
		- If A already has the public key of B, A can securely communicate with B.
		- When connecting to C, we can ask B to certify C's public key.
	- Public Key Infraestructure (PKI)
		- We rely on some certification authorities (CA)
		- They collect public keys and issue certificates signed with the CA's public key.
		- Users can use the CA's signature to verify the certificate.
	- How to know CA's public key?
		- We blindly trust some root CA which issues certificates to other CA. 
		- They emit a self signed certificates to themselves called root certificates.
		- Root CA public keys are obtained through a secure channel or present in ROM.
---
