# Server Technologies
---
[Go Back](../README.md)

---
## High Computational Power
- **CPU**
	- **Server Processor Families**: Intel Xeon and AMD EPYC
	- **Improvements**:
		- More # of cores per proc.
		- Multiple procs work collaboratively.
		- Bigger cache memory.
		- Bigger RAM sizes.
	- **Categories**: Entry level / Mid-range / High-end
- **RAM Memory**
	- **Technology**: DDR5
	- **Physical implementation**: DIMM DDR5
	- **Improvements**:
		- Motherboard with large # DIMM sockets.
		- DIMM sockets support for high capacity modules.
- **Storage**
	- RAID and SSDs for better performance.
---
### High storage capacity
- **Multi-bay design**:
	- **Drive bay:** Space of standardised size to host a hardware device.
	- **Disk bay sizes**: 2,5" (SFF) or 3,5" (LFF)
- **Connection**: SAS RAID controllers with SAS expanders.
---
## High Availability
### Reliability
- **Definition**: Probability that a component works correctly $t$ time
- **Calculations**:
		$$Reliability =e^\frac{-t}{MTBF}$$
	- MTBF = Mean Time Between Failures
	- $t$ shall include the leap years (or a portion of it)
	- The Failure Rate is $1 - Reliability$ 
	- Standard Metric: Annualised Failure Rate ($t = 8766$)
- **Problematic Components**:
	- Electro-mechanical characteristics and moving parts.
	- HDDs, PSU and fans.
- **RAM Reliability**
	- Types or errors: hard (hardware failures) or soft (electrical disturbances)
	- Error Correction Code (ECC) RAM
		- Basic ECC:  1b correction and 2b detection per 64b block
		- 8b checksum per 64b block
			- Done by the motherboard Error Detection and Correction Circuit (EDAC)
	- Implemented in every server very but low cost
### Component redundancy
- **Definition**: If a component fails, the server continue operating with a backup component.
- **Disks**: RAID 1, 5, 6 or 10
- **PSU**: Usually with redundancy 1 + 1 or 2 + 2
- **RAM configuration**:
	- Overview:
		- The processor memory controller has several channels.
		- Each channel manages several DIMM sockets.
		- Each channel can operate in parallel.
		- DIMM modules connected to the same channel work sequentially.
	- Online spare memory concept
		- One channel acts as a spare channel for another one.
		- Consequences: Half the capacity and paralellition loss.
	- Mirrored memory concept
		- One channel is a exact mirror of the other at any time.
		- Consequences: Half the capacity and paralellition loss.
### Hot-pluggable components
- **Definition**: Allow to connect/disconnect devices when the server is powered on.
- Disks:
	- Only one model.
	- Use of adapter trays.
- PSU and Fans.
---
## Off-line Management
- **Objective**: Manage a server through the network.
- **Types of Management** :
	- In-band or online Management.
		- Done through the main system with the OS running on top of it.
		- Windows provides a remote management API and Remote Desktop
	- Out-band or off-line Management. (Used in servers)
		- Uses a specific hardware subsystem for off-line management.
		- Power supply has an auxiliary power circuit
			- Always connected. Provides power to devices when server is in standby mode.
- **Off-line Management System independent components**:
	- RAM and flash memory
	- Processor (connected to the main system chipset)
	- 1G Network Interface
- **Off-line Management System functions**:
	- Remote startup, shutdown and reboot
	- Remote console service
	- Remote virtual media service (use remote media devices as if they were the server's)
	- Hardware platform status monitoring
- **Off-line Management System Example**: HPE iLO (Integrated Lights-Out)
- **Usage**: Independent, isolated Management Network
---
## Types of servers
- Form factors
	- **Tower**
		- Host an independent server with no other infrastructure.
		- Low to medium ranges. Affordable.
		- Used by small companies with only a few servers.
		- Example. HPE ProLiant ML
	- **Rack**
		- Is mounted into a rack.
		- Medium to high ranges. Expensive catalogue.
		- Used by companies with a DPC or large amount of servers
		- Example. HPE ProLiant DL
	- **Blade**
		- Blade system formed by a chasis and several blade servers.
		- The chasis can hold shared infrastructure.
		- Oriented to very dense computing (super-computing or massive virtualization)
---