# Graph & Local Search
---
[Go Back](../README.md)

---
## Graph Search
### Introduction
- Is a problem where we find a route or path from one point to another.
- Example:
	- Route in map
	- 8-puzzle
	- Robotic Assembly
	- 8-queens problem
	- Planning
	- Traveling Salesman Problem
- Performance metrics
	- Completeness (find a solution if exists)
	- Optimality (find best solution)
	- Time and space complexity
- Types
	- Trees
	- Graphs
### Uninformed algorithms
- Breath first (horizontal movement first)
- Uniform cost (Breath first but expands with the lowest path cost)
- Depth first (vertical movement first)
- Backtracking (Depth first but only one successor at a time)
### Informed A* Algorithm
- We have the evaluation function $f$ that estimates the cost.
	- A* Search. $f(n) = g(n) + h(n)$
	- Where $g$ is the cost of the path from the start to $n$
	- Where $g$ is the estimated cost of the cheapest path from n to goal.
- We explore always first the less cost choice.
- Find sub-optimal solutions quickly.
---
## Local Search
- We try to find the best state based on the current one
	- Path is irrelevant.
	- Pure optimisation problem.
	- Iterative process. Use current state only and move to neighbouring states to improve it.
- **Hill-climbing**
	- We start at a random point.
	- We continuously move to a higher state.
	- Often get stuck at a local maximum or plateaux.
	- Random-start hill climbing. We try again until we find a better solution or stop.
- **Genetic algorithms**
	1. Begin with a set of randomly generated states called population.
	2. Each state or individual is represented as a string over a finite alphabet (chromosomes)
	3. Evaluate the individuals (fitness function)
	4. Create next generation of states by combining the best rated individuals.
- **EDAs: Estimation of Distribution Algorithms**
	1. Begin with a set of randomly generated states.
	2. Evaluate the individuals (fitness function).
	3. Select the $N$ best rated individuals
	4. Estimate the probability distribution that models those individuals.
	5. Regenerate the population with that distribution.
---