# Recommender Systems
---
[Go Back](../README.md)

---
## Introduction
- Definition
	- Algorithm to learn the interests and preferences of consumers
	- The objective is to make recommendations tailored to that consumers tastes.
- Connect users and items
	- Manages large amounts of information
		- Collaborative filters. Feedback from users (implicit or explicit)
		- Content-based. Item characteristics
		- Hybrid. Both collaborative filters and content-based.
	- Act as sales assistants.
- Goals
	- Retrieve information. Suggest the correct proposals
	- Recommendation diversity (serendipity)
	- Long tail. Graph popularity-products
---
## Collaborative filters
- Wisdom of the crowd to make recommendations.
	- Users rate items in a catalogue implicitly or explicitly.
	- Customers with similar tastes in the past are assumed to have similar tastes in the future.
- Neighbourhood.
	- Compute similarity to make predictions.
		- user-user.
			- Correlation between users and mean for all items for each user.
			- Memory-based method. Not scalable to real world.
		- item-item.
			- Correlation between items and mean for all users for each item. 
			- Based on a model learned offline to make predictions.
			- Do not suffer from cold start. New users
	- We should include a threshold of similarity so no all neighbors are used.
	- Usually most of the items are not scored. We try to predict them.
	- Do not have a loss function to minimise. Not clear purpose.
---
## Machine Learning for Recommendation
- Regression (Exact values)
	- Fill gaps in the matrix with values that minimize the difference from predictions.
- Classification (Labels of a finite set)
	- Fill the gaps based on a finite set of labels we assume reliable.
- Preferences (Clues to order)
	- Fill the gaps based on relative comparisons for the scored items of each user.
---
## Matrix Factorisation
- If we assume the function $f$ fills the matrix.
	- $f(u, p) = \sum_{i,j}x_{ij}u_ip_j$
	- Where $u$ is the user, $p$ is the item and $X$ are the component weights.
	- Matrix of great dimension
- We factorise to reduce dimension.
	- Transform into a multiplication of two matrix of reduced dimensions
	- $f(u, p) = u^TXp = u^TW^TVp = <Wu, Vp>$
- Geometrical representation.
	- We embedded users and items into a common Euclidean space.
	- $f$ is proportional to the distance to a hyperplane.
---